# Zipped Lists

This is the predecessor to Xanadu, and the paper that coined the word "hypertext".

https://andymatuschak.org/files/papers/Nelson1965.pdf

"The kinds of file structures required if we are to use the
computer for personal files and as an adjunct to creativity
are wholly different in character from those customary in
business and scientific data processing. They need to provide
the capacity for intricate and idiosyncratic arrangements,
total modifiability, undecided alternatives, and thorough
internal documentation."

Zippered lists are intended for personal filing and manuscript assembly. They aid the creative process by allowing ideas to be rearranged.

Rather than imposing a hierarchical file system, it can file texts in any form and arrangement desired. It combines card file, loose leaf notebook etc.

It can hold not just files, but commentaries and explanations connected to them.

It also supports dynamic outlining, where a change in one text sequence guides an automatic change in another. Thus changing an outline also changes the main text.

It must also support different versions of the text, but the versions would remain indexed to one another so the equivalent parts can be compared, no matter how much they have changed.


    "Let me introduce the word “hypertext”***** to mean a body
    of written or pictorial material interconnected in such a
    complex way that it could not conveniently be presented or
    represented on paper. "
    
    "*****The sense of “hyper-” used here connotes extension and
    generality; cf. “hyperspace.” The criterion for this prefix is the
    inability of these objects to be comprised sensibly into linear
    media, like the text string, or even media of somewhat higher
    complexity. The ELF is a hyperfile."

